[Title Screen: Command Line Basics: viewing processes]

Let's take a look at command line basics: viewing processes.

Linux is a multitasking system: it switches rapidly from one executing program to another, so that it appears to execute multiple programs at the same time.

The different programs being executed are organized as processes.

To manage processes, each process is assigned a number calld a process ID, or PID.

A program can also launch another program by creating a new process.

The launching program is a parent process, and the launched program is a child process.

The most commonly used command to view processes is ps.

Let's take a look at the man page of ps.

[Type man ps ENTER]

ps gives us a snapshot of current proccesses.

[Press q to exit man]

Let's use ps to view current processes.

[Type ps ENTER]

We can see that both bash and ps are executed as processes, and their PIDs.

The TTY field shows the control terminal that the processes are associated with. It indicates the terminal device or window where the current session is running.

We can also see, in the TIME field, how much CPU time has been used by each process. This can help us to access whether the processes are running normally.

To see all processes of the current session, use ps with the x option, without a leading dash.

[Type ps x ENTER]

In addition to bash and ps x, here we see a sshd process that handles the current user's server connection.

We also see a STAT field, which indicates the current status of each process.

For example, upper case R indicates that the process ps x is running,

and upper case S indicates bash is sleeping, or waiting for input.

To see processes of all users, use ps with the aux option, without a leading dash.

[Type ps aux | tail -5 ENTER]

We now see information such as the user ID for each process, and the time when the process started.

ps provides only a snapshot of the processes at the time when the ps command is executed.

To see a dynamic view of processes, use the top command.

Like Activity Monitor on Mac or Task Manager on Windows, top provides a continuously updating display of processes, order by process activity.

By default, top updates every three seconds.

[Type top ENTER]

The first part of top's display is a summary of the system.

We can see the current time, 

[Highlight current system time in the output]

for how long the system has been up since the last boot,

[Highlight up time in the output]

number of logged in users,

[Highlight number of users in the output]

and a variety of statistics to indicate how the system is running.

To exit top, press q.

[Press q to exit top]