[Title Screen: Command Line Basics: access rights]

Let's take a look at command line basics: access rights.

Access rights to files and directories are defined in terms of read access, write access, and execution access.

We can use the ls -l command to see access rights of files and directories.

First, let's create a text file called foo.txt.

[Type > foo.txt ENTER]

Next, use the ls -l command to display the properties of foo.txt.

[Type ls -l foo.txt ENTER]

The first ten characters of the listing indicate files attributes.

[Highlight the file attributes in the output]

The first character indicates the file type.

[Highlight the first - in the output]

A hyphen means this is a regular file.

Other common values are 'd' for directories, and 'l' for symbolic links.

The next nine characters are called the mode, and are in groups of three.

The first three characters represent the read, write and execute permissions for the file's owner, 

[Highlight the first three characters of the nine]

The second group of three characters represent permissions for the file's group owner,

[Highlight the second three characters]

The last three characters represent persmissions for everybody else, or the world.

[Highlight the last three characters]

A hyphen means permission is not granted.

The character 'r' means read permission is granted.

If read permission is granted to a file, the file can be opened and read.

If read permission is granted to a directory, and execute permission is also granted, the directory's contents can be listed.

The character 'w' means write permission is granted.

If write permission is granted to a file, it allows a file to be written or truncated, but does not allow the file to be renamed or deleted.

If write permission is granted to a directory, and execute permission is also granted, it allows files to be created, deleted and renamed in that directory.

The character 'x' means execute permission is greanted.

If execute permission is granted to a file, the file can be treated as a program and executed. If the file is written is scripting languages, the read permission must also be granted to execute.

If read permission is granted to a directory, the directory can be entered, for example, in a cd command.

For symbolic links, the permissions are dummy values, and are always rwxrwxrwx. The real permissions on the actual files or directories that the symbolic links point to.