[Title Screen: Command Line Basics: command documentation]

Let's take a look at command line basics: command documentation.

Different types of commands have different types of documentation.

Once we know the type of a command, we can look for the appropriate kind of documentation.

First, shell builtins have built-in helps.

To use built-in help, type help followed by the name of the shell builtin.

Let's try to look at the help available for the command cd.

[Type help cd ENTER]

This is a description of the functionality and available options for the cd command.

On the other hand, executable programs, such as cat, do not have built-in help.

But there are still a few ways to display documentation for executable programs.

To display a description of how to use an executale program, use the dash dash help option.

Let's try to look at the usage information for the command cat.

[Type cat --help ENTER]

We see a summary of the command's usage, and available options.

Most executable programs also provide formal documentation in a manual page.

To view a command's full manual, use the command man.

man uses less to display the manual page, and the less navigation commands would work on the manual page display.

Let's look at cat's man page.

[Type man cat ENTER]

A command's manual is broken into sections.

Note that man is currently displaying section 1 of the manual for cat, which is usually the first matching manual page for a command.

[Highlight CAT(1) in the upper left corner]
[Press q to exit man]

If we need to look at a specific section of the manual, we can specify a section number for man.

Let's see how manual sections work with the command groff.

[Type man 7 groff ENTER]

This is the 'Miscellaneous' section of groff's manual page.

[Press q to exit man]

It is also possible to search manual pages for a specific term. To do this, use the command apropos, or man with the -k option.

Let's use apropos to find approriate commands whose man pages contain the term 'compare'.

[Type apropos compare ENTER]

apropos has found several commands that might be appropriate for comparing things.

To see a one-line description of an executable program, use the command whatis.

Let's see a brief discription of ls.

[Type whatis ls ENTER]

It is a one-line summary of what the command does.

Many executable programs also have hyperlinked information pages as an alternative to manual pages.

To access a program's info pages, use the command info.

[Type info ls ENTER]

This is the information page for the command ls.

Note that info pages are linked in a tree-like structure, and we can use keyboard shortcuts like n, p or u to navigate the pages.

[Press q to quit info]